---
layout: page
title: Peano's axioms
nav_order: 1
has_children: false
has_toc: false
parent: Induction 
grand_parent: Notes
---

## Axiomatic $~\mathbb{N}$

We all feel pretty comfortable with the natural numbers but 
how would you explain to a computer? In Lean, `Nat` is the type 
of the natural numbers. It looks like 
{% highlight lean %}
inductive Nat where
  | zero : Nat
  | succ (n : Nat) : Nat
{% endhighlight %}
The basic building blocks for `Nat` are a particular term, `zero`, 
and function `succ : Nat → Nat`.

The keyword `inductive` tells Lean to make all possible expressions 
using just these two pieces. How does that work? 

Well, to use `succ`, we need something plug in. We have `zero`. 
We can make a new term `succ zero`. With a new term, we can 
apply `succ` again to get `succ (succ zero)`. Now, we can apply 
`succ` again, etc... 

Thus, from the two pieces, `zero` and `succ`, we get a list of 
terms 
{% highlight lean %}
zero, succ zero, succ (succ zero), succ (succ (succ zero)),...
{% endhighlight %}
We would usually denote these as 
$$
0, 1, 2, 3,\ldots 
$$
The term `zero` is of course $0$ and `succ` is $n \mapsto n+1$ 
and is short for "successor". This makes plain the principle 
of childhood counting that we understand one natural number 
from all the ones that come before it. 

Giuseppe Peano provided an axiomatic characterization of the 
natural numbers in the last 1800s. It was based on this idea 
that everything is built from an initial element by 
applying a successor function.

**Definition**. The _natural numbers_ are a set $\mathbb{N}$ 
possessing a specified elements $0 \in \mathbb{N}$ called _zero_ 
and a function $s : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ called the 
_successor function_ and which satisfy the following conditions 
- For any $n \in \mathbb{N}$, $0 \neq s(n)$. 
- The successor function is injective: if $s(n) = s(m)$ then $n=m$.
- The set $\mathbb{N}$ is generated by $0$ and $s$: suppose we 
have a set $X$ which satisfies 
	- $0 \in X$ and 
	- For any $n \in \mathbb{N}$, if $n \in X$, then $s(n) \in X$

	Then $\mathbb{N} \subseteq X$.
In other words, if any set contains $0$ and contains a successor of 
any natural number it already contains, then it has to have all of 
$\mathbb{N}$ inside it. 

Another way to state the final condition: $\mathbb{N}$ is the smallest 
set to have $0$ and be closed under application of $s$.

In Lean, the injectivity ($0 \neq s(n)$ and $s(n) = s(m) \to n = m$) is 
built into the notion of an _inductive type_. 

It is important to note that, as defined above, $\mathbb{N}$ are a 
specification and **not** a construction. Lean's `Nat` is a construction 
that meets this specification. Below is another one. 

**Exmaple**. We can build the natural numbers starting from nothing! 
More precisely, the empty set $\varnothing$. We set $0 := \varnothing$ 
and $s(X) = X \cup \lbrace X \rbrace$. Then, 
$$
0 = \varnothing \\
s(0) = \lbrace \varnothing \rbrace \\
s(s(0)) = \lbrace \varnothing, \lbrace \varnothing \rbrace \rbrace \\
s(s(s(0))) =\lbrace \varnothing, \lbrace \varnothing, \lbrace \varnothing \rbrace \rbrace \rbrace \\
\vdots
$$
Then the _Von Neumann naturals_ is the set containing all these sets as 
elements. (The axioms of set theory guarantee such a set.)
